←
Of Edward the third and a Countesse
The Garland of Good Will
by Thomas Deloney
The Spanish Ladies love
A farewell to love
→
4967800The Garland of Good Will — The Spanish Ladies loveThomas Deloney
​
5.
The Spanish Ladies loue to an English Gentleman.
VVill you heare a Spanish Lady how she wooed an Englishman
Garments gay, as rich as may be, deckt with Iewels had she on,
Of a comely countenance, and grace was she:
And by birth and parentage of high degrée.
As his prisoner there he kept her, in his hands her life did lye:
Cupids hands did tie her faster, by the liking of her eye.
In his courteous company was all her ioy;
To fauour him in any thing, she was not coy.
At the last there came commandment, for to set the Ladies frée:
​With their Iewels still adorning, none to do them iniury.
Alas, then said the Lady gay, full woe is me:
O let me still sustaine this kind captiuity.
Gallant Captaine take some pitie of a Lady in distresse:
Leaue me not within the Citie, for to dye in heauinesse.
Thou hast set this present day, my bodie free:
But my heart in prison strong, remaines with thee.
How should thou faire Lady loue me whom thou knowest thy Countries foe:
Thy faire words makes me suspect thee, Serpents lie where flowers grow.
All the euill I thinke to thee, most courteous Knight:
God grant vnto my selfe the same, may fully light.
Blessed be the time and season, that you came on Spanish ground,
If you may our Foes be tearmed, ​gentle foes we haue you found.
With our Cities you haue won, our hearts each one:
Then to your Country beare away, that is your owne.
Rest you still (most gallant Lady) rest you still and wéepe no more:
Of faire louers there are plenty, Spaine doth yield a wondrous store.
Spaniards fraught with iealousse, we often find:
But English men through all the world are counted kind.
Leaue me not vnto a Spaniard, you alone enioy my heart:
I am louely, young and tender, loue is likewise my desert.
Still to serue thée day and night, my mind is prest:
The wife of euery Englishman is counted blest.
It would be a shame, faire Lady, for to beare a woman hence:
English souldiers neuer carry any such without offence.
​I will quickly change my selfe, if it be so:
And like a Page Ile follow thée, where ere thou go.
I haue neither gold nor siluer, to maintaine thée in this case:
And to trauell is great charges, as you know in euery place,
My chains and Iewels ouery one shall be thine owne:
And eke fiue hundred pounds in gold, that lyes vnknowne.
On the Seas are many dangers, many stormes do there arise:
Which will be to Ladies dreadfull, and force teares from watry eyes,
Well in worth I should endure extremity:
For I could find in heart to lose my life for thée.
Courteous Lady be contented, here comes all that bréeds the strife,
I in England haue already, a swéet woman to my wife.
I will not falsifie my vow ​for gold nor gaine:
Nor yet for all the fairest Dames that liue in Spaine.
O how happy is that woman that enioyes so true a friend:
Many dayes of ioy God send you, of my suit Ile make an end.
Upon my knées I pardon craue for this offence;
Which loue and true affection did first commence.
Commend me to thy louing Lady, beare to her this chaine of gold,
And these bracelets for a token, grieuing that I was so bold.
All my Iewels in like sort beare thou with thée:
For these are fitting for thy wife, and not for me.
I will spend my dayes in prayer, Loue and all her lawes defie:
In a Nunnery will I shrewd me, farre from other company.
But ere my prayers haue an end, be sure of this,
​To pray for thée and for thy loue, I will not misse.
Thus farewell most gentle Captaine, and farewell my hearts content:
Count not Spanish Ladies wanton, though to thée my loue was bent.
Ioy and true prosperitie, go still with thée:
The like fall euer to thy share, most faire Lady.